---
layout: post
title:  "Metis Transition and the Subway Project"
date:   2015-09-25
---

I was really excited to start the bootcamp at Metis, I was eager to get my hands on some projects and flex my skills and show that I could be a data scientist.  However, what I didn't realize is just how fast we were going to go until I was told that the first project was due on Friday, just 5 days away.  Here's some data and a general problem, now go figure out what you want to do, is what they told us.  I stopped to think and realized, up until now the questions I was asked to answer were generally laid out pretty well in front of me, even in my thesis the problem was well defined and the questions we asked were about how do we tune the model and how does this compare to other models.  In this moment of contemplation, I realize that I really didn't know what questions I wanted to ask, what could I possibly want to try and understand from this data?

I decided that I'd just figure that out later and dive right into the data, which thankfully was easy to find and generally well behaved without any missing information.  As I combed through the data, however, I did realize that there were some oddities and likely bad pieces of data.  In general, each turnstile would report every four hours starting at midnight.  Some stations would report starting at 4 instead and occasionally there would be odd gaps between reports.  The suspicious data, however, was more related to the number of entries, some were reportin 30+ thousand people through one turnstile at one station which seems very unlikely so I dropped entries where there were entries greater than about four thousand.

With the data cleaned up and some additional wrangling to combine all of the turnstiles for each station I could finally start asking questions of the data.  The obvious first step was to plot out the traffic patterns for stations to see what patterns there were over the 12 week period.  The results ended up being predictable, commuter stations have much more traffic during the week and then it falls off on weekends.  So with that insight under my belt I delved deeper into the data and just looked at the average values by hour at Times Square-42nd Street.  To my surpise I noticed almost nobody was entering that station early in the morning which seemed a bit puzzling considering as its such a busy station.  However, when I was chatting with my group members, one of them made a really good point and that's the fact that nobody lives anywhere near Times Square.  And I thought that was really interesting, its intuitive that that's what's really going on but its maybe not totally obvious until you have the data in front of you.

In the end I didn't get as much time as I would've liked to explore the data but I had to put together my insights and prepare a narrative with my group members to satisfy the problem.  The problem we were given was that we were helping Women Tech Women Yes, a women in tech advocacy group to collect emails for their gala using teams at subway stations.  We were investigating how to strategically place these teams to collect not only the most emails, but emails of people who would support their cause.  But because of limited time we really only investigated which stations were the busiest.  However we did outline an prototype application that would combine the traffic data that we analyzed with maps of tech companies and women advocacy groups to find high traffic stations in neighborhoods where these types of people likely work.

On the whole it was quite an intense week but very rewarding, I'm looking forward to all of the future projects and hopefully with the extra time they won't feel as cramped as this one!